Zika virus (ZIKV) is a member of the virus family Flaviviridae. It is spread by daytime-active Aedes mosquitoes, such as A. aegypti and A. albopictus. Its name comes from a forest in Uganda, where the virus was first isolated in 1947
Zika virus is related to the dengue, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis related viruses.Since the 1950s, it has been known to occur within a narrow equatorial belt from Africa to Asia. From 2007 to 2016, the virus spread eastward, to the Americas, leading to the 2015–16 Zika virus epidemic
The infection, known as Zika fever or Zika virus disease, often causes no or only mild symptoms, similar to a very mild form of dengue fever.While there is no specific treatment, paracetamol (acetaminophen) and rest may help with the symptoms.
As of 2016, the illness cannot be prevented by medications or vaccines.Zika can spread from a pregnant woman to her baby. This can result in microcephaly, severe brain malformations, and other birth defects.Zika infections in adults may result rarely in Guillain–Barré syndrome.
Zika was first known to infect humans from the results of a serological survey in Uganda, published in 1952
In January 2016, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued travel guidance on affected countries, including the use of enhanced precautions, and guidelines for pregnant women including considering postponing travel.
There are two Zika lineages: the African lineage and the Asian lineage. Phylogenetic studies indicate that the virus spreading in the Americas is 89% identical to African genotypes, but is most closely related to the Asian strain that circulated in France during the 2013–2014 outbreak.
Zika is primarily spread by the female Aedes aegypti mosquito, which is active mostly in the daytime. The mosquitos must feed on blood to lay eggs.
The potential societal risk of Zika can be delimited by the distribution of the mosquito species that transmit it. The global distribution of the most cited carrier of Zika, A. aegypti, is expanding due to global trade and travel. A mosquito population capable of carrying Zika has been found in a neighborhood of Washington, DC, and genetic evidence suggests they survived at least four consecutive winters in the region. 
Zika can be transmitted from men and women to their sexual partners; most known cases involve transmission from symptomatic men to women. As of April 2016, sexual transmission of Zika has been documented in a few countries – Chile, France, Italy, New Zealand, and the United States – during the 2015 outbreak.
As of April 2016, two cases of Zika transmission through blood transfusions have been reported globally, both from Brazil, after which the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommended screening blood donors and deferring high-risk donors for 4 weeks.
Zika fever (also known as Zika virus disease) is an illness caused by the Zika virus.Most cases have no symptoms, but when present they are usually mild and can resemble dengue fever. Symptoms may include fever, red eyes, joint pain, headache, and a maculopapular rash.
Symptoms generally last less than seven days.It has not caused any reported deaths during the initial infection.Infection during pregnancy causes microcephaly and other brain malformations in some babies. Infection in adults has been linked to Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS).
The World Health Organization has suggested that priority should be to develop inactivated vaccines and other nonlive vaccines, which are safe to use in pregnant women
As of March 2016, 18 companies and institutions were developing vaccines against Zika, but they state a vaccine is unlikely to be widely available for about 10 years